'No chilling' - Khabib sends Nurmagomedov back to gym

02:48
Media caption,
Highlights: Nurmagomedov defeats Hughes in Dubai
ByPaul Battison
BBC Sport Journalist
Published
13 October 2025
7 Comments
Usman Nurmagomedov chuckles when asked what his cousin Khabib said to him after his hard-fought win over Paul Hughes this month.
Nurmagomedov retained his PFL lightweight world title against the Irishman in Dubai, but Khabib, who was in his corner, could be heard screaming at the Russian during some contentious moments in the fight.
Nurmagomedov says he is back in the gym despite enjoying only one week of rest after the fight - on Khabib's orders.
"At first he was so happy and congratulated me," Usman tells BBC Sport.
"But then he said 'You have to be starting training. Because we don't have time for stopping and chilling. We're here to work'.
"I said 'OK, brother. Give me one week'. He said 'OK, one week'."
Former UFC lightweight champion Khabib turned to coaching after retiring undefeated in 2020 with 29 wins from 29 fights.
Nurmagomedov's victory was his second over Hughes after a narrow win in January, but the judges' scorecards did not reflect a close battle - they scored it 50-45, 49-46 and 48-47.
"My opinion: I won every round; I took him down in every round. I threw my jab very well. And if he only did a couple of shots, I did more than him," said Nurmagomedov.
"In my opinion there was no 50-45. It was like 48-46 or 48-47.
"People can talk. I don't care what people think about me or my fight. The people who understand the fight, they know this was high level."

Hughes, 28, said after the fight that he "did not do enough" to win.
Nurmagomedov says the rivalry with Hughes has made him a better fighter.
Nurmagomedov trained in the mountains in his native Dagestan before the fight, saying he would envision fighting Hughes every night before sleeping and every morning after waking up.
Nurmagomedov sees Hughes as a future champion - if Nurmagomedov leaves the PFL - and says he has the skills to be successful in the UFC.
"I honestly see Hughes in UFC because a guy with those skills... he's a very mentally strong guy and didn't give up in this fight," said Nurmagomedov.
Nurmagomedov is targeting a return to action inside three months.
Following the victory, he called out Britain's Alfie Davis, who won the PFL lightweight tournament.
Davis was a huge underdog going into the tournament, but defeated Gadzhi Rabadanov on points to claim the title and £369,000 in prize money.
Davis posted his delight at the potential title fight on social media, but Nurmagomedov was not convinced by his emotions.
"I saw he was so happy to hear his name, but I know sometimes behind your smile you try to protect your reaction," said Nurmagomedov.
"He's not happy, I know that. I'll take his belt and put it on my shoulder."